
We conducted our own comparison of the two APLs and an analysis of the key points, and we've noticed some missing key points. These are:
Certification of Terminal Illness and Necessary Documentation: Requirements for the initiation of outpatient hospice services include a certification by the attending physician and/or the hospice medical director that a member has a terminal illness with a life expectancy of six months or less,, and the member's election of hospice services in lieu of curative care for the terminal illness.
Election of hospice care occurs when the Member or Authorized Representative voluntarily files an election statement with the hospice Provider.
For the initial 90-day benefit period, the hospice Provider must obtain written certification statements from the medical director of the hospice, the physician designee (as defined in 42 CFR 418.3), or the physician member of the hospice interdisciplinary group; as well as the Member's attending physician (generally the Member’s Primary Care Physician and/or referring physician), if the Member has an attending physician. For subsequent benefit periods, the certification must be done by the medical director of the hospice, the physician designee, or the physician member of the hospice interdisciplinary group.
Palliative items or services in the context of Medi-Cal hospice benefits are defined separately from the services referenced in Medi-Cal Palliative Care, as defined in APL 18-020, or subsequent APLs.
The hospice Provider must submit the MCP Member’s signed hospice revocation statement to the Member’s respective MCP within five calendar days.
Hospice Rates:
The Medicaid hospice rates for hospices’ four levels of care are calculated based on the annual hospice rates established under Medicare. These rates are authorized by federal law, which also provides for an annual increase in payment rates for hospice care services. MCPs must update their rates annually to coincide with changes to the Medicare rates. (Title 42 USC section 1395f(i)(1)(C)(ii)).
MCPs may pay more, but not less than, the Medicare rate for hospice services.
Dually Eligible Medicare and Medi-Cal
MCPs must cover cost sharing for contracted services. For dually eligible SNF residents, in accordance with the Medicare Benefit Policy Manual (Chapter 9) section 20.3 - Election by Skilled Nursing Facility and Nursing Facilities Residents and Dually Eligible Beneficiaries, payment for room and board must be made directly to the hospice Provider. The room and board charge is billed to Medi-Cal only. the MCP as the hospice benefit under Medicare does not cover room and board. Additionally, MCPs cannot require a copy of an Explanation of Benefits, Remittance Advice, or denial letter from Medicare to accompany room and board claims.
